---
layout: post
title: "NBA Past and Future Payrolls"
category: data
---

I went ahead and gave the [NBA](/nbapayrolls) the same treatment that
I gave the [MLB](/mlbpayrolls) last week:

<a href="/nbapayrolls">
<img src="/images/nbapayrolls_thumbnail.png"
     alt="NBA Payrolls Thumbnail"
     border="1" width="600" height="413">
</a>

As with the MLB visualization, there's a couple caveats. The biggest
one is that I'm using contract data from [Basketball
Reference](http://www.basketball-reference.com/) that shows what each
player is being paid each year. The sum of these salaries almost
always exceeds the salary cap each year. That's because the salary cap
is actually a soft cap. There's a lot of different situations where a
team can sign a player that would put them over the cap. I am no
expert on [all](http://www.spotrac.com/cap-tracker/nba/) the
[details](http://www.cbafaq.com/salarycap.htm) and there are [better
resources](http://espn.go.com/nba/tradeMachine) to learn about what is
allowed and what is not. This visualization is great at providing a
general idea of what each team's cap space is, but it won't tell you
its exact size. Also, option years of any kind (team or player) are
included in each player's contract and thus the team totals as well.

There are a couple cool story lines that you can explore using the
visualization. The one that may stand out the most is the current
leader in payroll: the Brooklyn Nets. Scrolling through the years
makes it pretty easy to identify when [this
guy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mikhail_Prokhorov) swooped in to buy
the team. It'll be fun to watch this season to see if all the money
spent since then can buy a good playoff performance.

Scrolling forward just one year shows the incredible amount of cap
space the Lakers will have to work with next summer. The details of
the cap mean that it won't be quite as much as the chart seems to
imply, but they still have [a lot of
options](http://www.grantland.com/blog/the-triangle/post/_/id/69215/how-the-lakers-salary-cap-reality-makes-the-lebron-carmelo-summer-of-2014-a-pipe-dream)
when the time comes.

Scrolling back to the 2005-06 season shows just how much money the
Knicks were paying at the time. The amount that the Knicks have had to
pay in luxury tax is simply
[astounding](http://www.shamsports.com/2013/07/complete-history-of-luxury-tax-payments.html). What
may be even more astonishing is their lack of results to show for it.

It's time to come clean a bit about these visualizations. I absolutely
love working with data and presenting it in a way that is beautiful,
easy to understand, and educational. I've also really wanted to get a
better grasp of the markets in these different sports so this was a
natural project for me to take on. But mostly, I want to get a job
doing this type of thing with any kind of data. Whether it's making
predictions based on a trove of past behavior or visualizing the
trends to make sense of it, I have quite the passion for working with
data. I can think of [one website](http://www.fivethirtyeight.com/)
that is currently looking for that type of thing. [Contact
me](https://twitter.com/mrphilroth) if you'd like to learn more.

